# Digital Toolbox

## Dr. Gillian Andrews

## Key words:

Adobe Creative Suite, digital skills, digital literacy


##  Course Description


The Digital Toolbox provides essential skills in digital media applications
including developing text, still and moving images, information graphics, and
audio files for Web-based presentation for a wide range of communication
professions and serves as a foundation for more advanced courses involving
Web-based production. Offered Fall and Spring. Three Credits LA.


## Introduction to the Course


This course addresses technological convergence and the reality that all
students must have an introductory knowledge of the production of digital
narratives. The Digital Toolbox focuses on the ways in which digital
communication tools can be used to support the types of narratives that
communication students are likely to produce (news, magazines, press releases,
fictional narratives for small screens, and so on). It is a designed as a lab-
based course, allowing students to develop a set of basic skills required for
the manipulation of sound and image in digital environments. Students will
learn the basics of Illustrator (graphic design software), Photoshop (photo
editing software), InDesign (print and digital publishing software), Final Cut
Pro (video editing software), and Wordpress (web content management system).
For students of communication, these skills are essential to basic literacy;
without them, they have little hope of success in their chosen areas of
expertise.

In addition, this course will help to foster media literacy, a primary goal of
the Communication and Media Arts departments. Although this is primarily a
“how to” course, the knowledge of what is behind the production of digital
narratives gives students a glimpse of how editorial and creative decisions
shape stories. In challenging students to reflect on their own decisions, this
course will support our effort to create both ethical producers and informed
consumers of narratives, in whatever form of delivery. Students in all
Communication concentrations – Advertising, Communication Studies, Interactive
Media, Journalism, Public Relations/Organizational Communication, Radio, TV &
Film, and Sports Communication – need the technological tools associated with
digital narratives for their upper-level courses, internships and jobs.

## Required Materials

  * Account at Lynda.com

  * Account at Wordpress.com (a multi-user [MU] content management system
[CMS])

  * Account at Youtube.com

  * SD Card

  * External Hard Drive

  * 1 pair of headphones or ear buds



## Resources

I've compiled a list of sites which may be useful to you in teaching yourself
more about working with websites, images, and video:

  * [Video resources][1]

  * [Web resources][2]

  * [Image resources][3]

  * [Other resources][4] for keeping your computer running smoothly




## Course Objectives


This class will introduce students to the basic principles and techniques of
digital media. Students will develop a set of basic skills required for the
manipulation of sound and image in digital environments. In addition, students
will learn the basics of Illustrator (graphic design software), Photoshop
(photo editing software), InDesign (print and digital publishing software),
Final Cut Pro (video editing software), Audition (audio production software),
and Wordpress.com (web content management system).


Students will critique their own and each other’s work in class with the
intent to give helpful feedback. There will be many opportunities for
improvement. The premise is that one learns more effectively through extensive
practice and revising. In addition to lectures and class discussions, small
group work and class exercises will be utilized. Specific objectives for
students are:

  1. Understand the role of digital media in a wide range of communication &
media arts fields. (Projects)

  2. Have an essential vocabulary relevant to digital media applications.
(Projects)

  3. Be able to create audio and visual narratives for the Web. (Projects)

  4. Have a basic understanding of how to use content management systems.
(Projects, website)

  5. Be able to create a digital portfolio integrating all of the skills
listed above. (Website)

Achievement of these outcomes will be assessed through multiple projects and a
final presentation. Organization of the Class This class meets twice each
week. Each class will be comprised of lecture, discussion and creating.
Students should come to class prepared to listen, take notes, create and
critique their own and others’ works. As a general rule, class meetings will
involve brief instruction on new skills and concepts and then students will
immediately apply those concepts within assigned projects.

<table border="1" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="5">
    <tr>
      <td width="10%" valign="top"><p><strong>Session</strong></p></td>
      <td width="44%" valign="top"><p><strong>Topic(s)</strong></p></td>
      <td width="44%" valign="top"><p><strong>Due</strong></p></td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><p>1 T 8/28  
        <br />
      </p></td>
      <td>Review of course description and requirements including hardware and  
        software requirements and the tools to be used this term. </td>
      <td>Project  Add bio and picture to “My Workspace” in iLearn. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>R 8/30</td>
      <td>File management and servers. How we're going to manage our files so they're easy for us to find and share. Basic concepts about servers.</td>
      <td><br />
        Read<br />
        http://computer.howstuffworks.com/web-server.htm</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        2  T 9/4               
        <br />
        R 9/6</td>
      <td><p>Review copyright.  <br />
        A brief history of digital media and an introduction to  
        some essential concepts, including working with directories, files, and file  
        formats.  </p>
        <p>Introduction to the workshop process.</p></td>
      <td><p>Read  
        http://creativecommons.org/about/licenses/about copyright <br />
        Preview of Illustrator.  
        Project   Replicating a Magazine Cover in Illustrator. </p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        3  T 9/11        
        <br />
        R 9/13 </td>
      <td>Workshop magazine covers in class.</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td colspan="3">Project  Magazine Cover due 9/13 before 1:00 pm. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        
        4  T 9/18       
        <br />
        R 9/20 </td>
      <td>Image editing and file types.  
        
      </td>
      <td>Lab  Using Photoshop to import photos for tutorials in various photo editing  
        techniques.  
        Project  
        Start Ideal Dorm Room. Watch tutorial available on the class iLearn site.   
        Capture 10 high-­‐quality digital or scanned photographic images that can be  
        used to represent what you want your ideal dorm room to look like. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        5  T 9/25  
        <br />
        R 9/27 </td>
      <td>Overview of photo-­‐oriented Web sites.  
        
      </td>
      <td>Lab  
        Using photos for news storytelling, including creation and evaluation.   
        Preparing images for the Web and constructing photo essays.   
        More on photo-­‐editing software.  
        Project  Photo Essay assignment.    
        Ideal Dorm Room due 9/27 before 1:00 pm. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td colspan="3">Project due</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        
        6  T 10/2  
        <br />
        R 10/4 </td>
      <td>Introduction to InDesign.   
        
        Lab  InDesign.   
        Watch tutorial on InDesign on class iLearn site.  
      </td>
      <td>Project  Continue to develop Photo Essay.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        7  T 10/9   
        R 10/11</td>
      <td> InDesign Interactivity.  
        
      </td>
      <td>Lab  Creating simple buttons for Photo Essay.  
        Project  Continue to develop Photo Essay.  
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>8  M 10/16     
        R  10/18</td>
      <td> Animation in InDesign. Bringing motion to photo essays.  
        Lab  Introduction to InDesign.</td>
      <td>Project  Publish Photo Essay to Web.  Photo Essay due 10/18 before 1:00 pm. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td colspan="3">Project Due</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        
        
        9  T 10/23  
        <br />
        R 10/25 </td>
      <td>Introduction to audio and video storytelling and associated file types.  
        Royalty free music.    
      </td>
      <td>Lab  Using script formats.    
        Project  
        Create 100 word proposal for a 3 minute Documentary related to a  
        current event.  Proposal due 3/22.  
        Create a 2-­‐3 page script outline based on your proposal; due 3/26. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        10  T 10/30    
        <br />
        R 11/1 </td>
      <td>Video storytelling. Using video cameras.  
        
      </td>
      <td>Lab  Basics of video recording, including lighting, camera settings, tripods, etc.  
        Project  Shoot video story for proposed Documentary.    
        Footage due 11/1 before 1:00 pm. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td colspan="3">Footage due</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        
        11  T 11/6   
        <br />
        R 11/8</td>
      <td> Introduction to Final Cut Pro.  
      </td>
      <td>Lab  Begin working with Final Cut Pro.  
        Project  Begin editing documentary projects. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        12  T 11/13  
        <br />
        R 11/15 </td>
      <td>Using video, photos, effects, sound and transitions for video stories.   
      </td>
      <td>Lab  Editing stories in Final Cut Pro.  
        Project  Edit Documentary project. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        13  T 11/20  
        <br />
        R 11/22 </td>
      <td>Documentaries continued. </td>
      <td>Lab  Troubleshooting documentaries.  
        Project  Finish Documentary project.  Documentary due 11/20 before 1:00 pm.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td colspan="3">Documentary Due</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td colspan="3">
        Thanksgiving Holiday 11/22  </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        
        14  T 11/27  
        <br />
        R 11/29 </td>
      <td>Website development.  
      </td>
      <td>Lab  Continue website development.  
        Project  Websites due 11/27 before 1:00 pm. Peer evaluations in class on 11/29. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>&nbsp;</td>
      <td>&nbsp;</td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        
        15  T 12/4   
        <br />
        R 12/6 </td>
      <td>Troubleshooting &amp; Wrap up.</td>
      <td> Lab  Addressing problems in the final projects.  
        Project  Prepare for final presentations.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        16    
        Final Exam Period.</td>
      <td>Final Websites Due.  
        Presentation of projects. </td>
    </tr>
    
  </table>
  <p>  
  <h2>  Fair Use and Copyright </h2>
  
  Wherever possible, students are urged to develop original content. This includes artwork, photography, video and music. 
  Under no circumstances will the instructor condone republishing of copyrighted material, on the Web or elsewhere, unless 
  intention is clearly articulated through other theory and purpose. Any student choosing to appropriate multimedia content 
  from other sources must obtain written permission from the relevant copyright owner and provide proper credit within the 
  student’s work.
  <h3>Resources for Copyright and Fair Use: </h3>
  <ul>
    <li>  http://creativecommons.org/about/licenses/ </li>
    <li>  http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/videos/remix_culture_fair_use_is_your_friend/ </li>
    <li> http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/files/pdf/online_best_practices_in_fair_use.pdf</li>
  </ul>
  <table cellspacing="5" border="1px">
    <tr colspan="2">
      <td> <h3>Grading</h3></td>
      <td><h3>Grading Scale</h3></td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><ul>
        <li>Projects 70% </li>
        <li>Final project 20% </li>
        <li> Presentation 10%</li>
      </ul></td>
      
      <td><ul>
        <li>93 - 100 = A </li>
        <li>90 - 92 = A- </li>
        <li>87 - 89 = B+ </li>
        <li>83 - 86 = B</li>
        <li> 80 - 82 = B- </li>
        <li>77 - 79 = C+ </li>
        <li>73 - 76 = C </li>
        <li>70 - 72 = C- </li>
        <li>67 - 69 = D+ </li>
        <li>63 - 66 = D </li>
        <li>< 60 = F </li>                                                         
      </ul></td>
    </tr>
  </table>


##  Fair Use and Copyright

Wherever possible, students are urged to develop original content. This
includes artwork, photography, video and music. Under no circumstances will
the instructor condone republishing of copyrighted material, on the Web or
elsewhere, unless intention is clearly articulated through other theory and
purpose. Any student choosing to appropriate multimedia content from other
sources must obtain written permission from the relevant copyright owner and
provide proper credit within the student’s work.

### Resources for Copyright and Fair Use:

  * http://creativecommons.org/about/licenses/

  * http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/videos/remix_culture_fair_use_is_your_
friend/

  * http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/files/pdf/online_best_practices_in_fai
r_use.pdf

### Grading

### Grading Scale

  * Projects 70%

  * Final project 20%

  * Presentation 10%

  * 93 - 100 = A

  * 90 - 92 = A-

  * 87 - 89 = B+

  * 83 - 86 = B

  * 80 - 82 = B-

  * 77 - 79 = C+

  * 73 - 76 = C

  * 70 - 72 = C-

  * 67 - 69 = D+

  * 63 - 66 = D

  * < 60 = F

##  Assignments & Evaluation Policies

Each student must complete the assignment for the day and come prepared to
discuss what you have read and/or created. Class participation is required.
You must be able to relate what you have read to what you are seeing and
discussing in class.

To help you develop basic skills, you will complete five projects designed to
incorporate the use of digital tools appropriate for websites and web-based
storytelling. These are a Magazine Cover, Ideal Dorm Room, Photo Essay, and
Mini- Documentary. Assignments will be introduced in class. You then will be
expected to spend time in the lab outside of class time to complete each
assignment (assessment of goals 1-4).

For your final project, you will develop a coherent and professional-looking
Website at Wordpress.com. The criteria for the successful Website will be
described in a handout (assessment of goal 5).

Websites will be presented to the class during the final week of classes for
critique. You will then be allowed to fine tune your site after receiving peer
evaluations. A site evaluation handout will be provided (assessment of goals
1-2).

In general, you will lose points for every misspelled word, grammar mistake,
fragment or run-on sentence, improper punctuation, passive voice, and/or
incorrect formatting. Do not email assignments to the instructor unless it is
an emergency.

**All assignments are due at 1:00 pm on the duedate.** Work turned in to the
Drop Box after this time will result in 10 points per day being deducted from
the earned grade.

In order to demonstrate the breadth and depth of their knowledge, students
will compile their projects for inclusion in their final project, the website.
These samples are class projects that have been polished. After fine tuning
each one, save the new clean copy and then include it in your website. You
MUST include new, polished copies of all your projects on your website to
receive credit for this assignment. Your website should incorporate everything
you have learned in the class and be an expression of your professional
potential.

Any work that receives a grade of less than a C may revised within two weeks
of the student receiving her/his grade. The new grade and the old grade will
be averaged. If a work receives a grade of less than a C because it was
originally turned in after its due date (it was late), it may not be revised.

Cheating of any kind in this class will result in you being dropped from the
class, a grade of “F” recorded as your final grade, and your name forwarded to
the Dean and to the Center for Advising and Academic Services.

## GRADING

  * **A.** An A student is one who, in addition to all the qualities
manifested by a B student, seeks mastery of a special field; s/he has
initiative and originality in attacking and solving problems; s/he shows
ability in rethinking problems, making associations, and adapting to new and
changing situations; moreover, s/ he has an appropriate vocabulary at his or
her command.

  * **B.** To earn a B grade a student must manifest all the qualities
characteristic of a C student and in addition be able to demonstrate skills
beyond the basic elements of the course; s/he has a more personal grasp of the
principles of the course and perceives wider application of them. The student
should be able to discuss the subject matter of the course with ease.

  * **C.** To earn a C grade a student must be able to demonstrate the basic
skills of a course, understand the essential background and materials of a
course, apply the basic principles involved, and express them intelligibly.

  * **D.** A student who is deficient in some degree in any of the areas that
are characteristic of a C grade will earn a D.

  * **F.** The student has failed to show mastery of the basic subject matter
for the course.

The grades of A-, B+, B-, C+, C-, D+, D- are used to indicate that a student
has shown more or less than the usual competency required for that grade.

## Disability support

Students with disabilities who believe they may need accommodations in this
class are encouraged to contact the Office of Special Services at 575-3274,
Donnelly Hall 226, or via email at specserv@marist.edu as soon as possible to
better ensure that such accommodations are implemented in a timely fashion.

## Cell Phone Policy

To help you and everyone around you concentrate, cell phone ringers and
vibrations are to remain OFF during class, as they would in a professional
office. Please refrain from texting, calling, or answering texts or calls in
class.

(I thought about saying "go ahead and text anyone who can give you technical
assistance on an assignment you're having trouble with in lab," because we'll
all be giving each other help in class anyway, but for two reasons I think
this is a bad idea: one, I don't want to interrupt anyone ELSE'S class, and
two, it's important that we share and build on the expertise in this class.
Here's a rough priority list of how you should seek help in class:

  1. Use a knowledgebase (forum, help page, manual) for the software you're
using

  2. Do a Web search for the problem you're having

  3. Open the question up to the class

  4. THEN email or otherwise contact your "lifeline" in a way that won't
interrupt them.)

## ATTENDANCE POLICY

Attendance and punctuality are required. It is each student’s responsibility
to sign the attendance sheet during every class. **Failure to sign the sheet
will result in an absence being recorded for that day.** If someone else signs
in for you, you will both lose three points from your final grade. If the
person who signs in for you admits to her/his misdeed, then only one point
will be deducted from your grade and her/his grade. Every student will be
allowed to miss two classes for any reason without a penalty. There are no
excused or unexcused absences.** Every absence after the first two absences
will result in three points being deducted from the student’s final grade.**
Attendance will be taken at the beginning of class.

Arriving late and/or leaving early is unacceptable. It shortchanges the
latecomer or early departer and distracts others. Do not arrive late to class
or leave class early.

Every tardy or early departure will result in one point being deducted from
your final grade. NO EXCUSES!

## How to Do Well in This Class

  * Attend all classes and participate constructively, i.e. answer questions,
ask questions, and offer helpful suggestions for others’ works.

  * Complete each tutorial. While you do so, post any questions you may have
to the class wiki's "Questions" page, and sharing tips and tricks you have
learned on the "Tips and Tricks" page for that particular piece of software.

  * Complete each project by discovering what it is you need and want to do,
exploring the possibilities, and implementing them in a creative and
utilitarian way.

  * Present your final website to the class with style and on time.

  * Do not cheat on any assignment.

  * Do not spam the instructor with any kind of communication, be it voice,
text, video, or direct messages in Second Life. (Particularly not direct
messages in Second Life, I'm almost never there anymore.)

