# Media Literacy

## Room LT 209

**COM 155L111 Monday and Thursday 9:30 am-10:45 am

COM 155L112 Monday and Thursday 12:30 pm-1:45 pm  **

## Dr. Gillian Andrews

**Office: LT 226

Office hours: Tuesdays noon-3:00,

Online office hours: Wednesdays 2:30-5:30. Online location to be announced.**

## Key words:

media studies, digital literacies, new literacy, semiotics, new media,
communication theory, media ecology

## Description

Media Literacy is an introduction to the ways media influences its own future
as well as our own. This course will help students become more critical of our
media environment and more effective communicators of ideas, perspectives, and
knowledge. Media Literacy comprises film, television, radio, the Web, and
digital games. As both consumers and producers of media, we will analyze and
make sense of the myriad ways that media informs, obscures, propagates, sells,
and makes whole our sense of individuality and community. Topics include
visual signification, digital media, the social functions of the image, and
the role of media in the cultural process.

## Goals and objectives

Students will:

  * Confront and assess their own preconceived ideas about media, technology,
and literacy;

  * Distinguish between the affordances of different media;

  * Understand relationships between technical and meaning-creating practices;

  * Develop a language for media technology and signification;

  * Understand how media technologies interact with identity;

  * Be able to articulate cultural and political implications of
communication, with attention to concerns of power and equity.

## Required books

Lessig, L. (2006) Code: And Other Laws of Cyberspace, Version 2.0. Basic
Books.


McChesney, R. (2004) The Problem of the Media. New York: Monthly Review Press.

Sardar, Z, and Van Loon, B. (2010) Introducing Media Studies: A Graphic Guide.
Icon Books.

Shirky, C. (2008). Here Comes Everybody. New York: The Penguin Press.

## Other readings


Brunton, F. (in press). The Art Of Misdirection: Robot Readability. in _Spam:
A Flood, A Theory, A History_. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press

Buckingham, D. (2003). _Media Education. _Polity.


Clanchy, M. (1993). Selection from _From Memory to Written Record_, England
1066-1307. Oxford: Blackwell.


Feynman, R. (1985). Judging books by their covers. In _Surely You're Joking,
Mr. Feynman!._ New York: W.W. Norton.

Hammer, J., Black, J., Kinzer, C., Andrews, G., Zhou, Z. (2008). A Process-PFL
Approach to Learning in Video Games. Submitted to the American Educational
Research Association conference.


Hargittai, E. (2008). [The Role of Expertise in Navigating Links of
Influence.][1] In The Hyperlinked Society, Turow J and Lokman Tsui, eds. Ann
Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press.


Hobbs, R. (1998). The Seven Great Debates in the Media Literacy Movement.
Journal of Communication, 48(1), 16-32.


Gauntlett, D. (1998). Ten things wrong with the effects model. In R.
Dickinson, Ramaswani Harindranath & Olga Linne (Ed.), _Approaches to
Audiences: A Reader_. London: Arnold.

Gee, J. P. (2003). _What Video Games Have To Teach Us About Learning and
Literacy_. Palgrave Macmillan.

Lesser, G. (1975). Selection from _Children and Television: Lessons from
Sesame Street._ Random House, Inc.

McChesney, R.

Prandstraller, F. (2002). Virtual proximity: Creating Connection in an Online
Fan Community. _Gnovis (Georgetown University online Journal of Communication,
Culture, and Technology), 3.

_


## ASSIGNMENTS

Students will complete a variety of in-class and homework assignments that ask
them to reflect on the reading and to effectively use digital tools to create
new media texts. The following assignments will allow the instructor to
evaluate their progress.


Due Thursday, August 30: [Media panics (1 page)][2] (no grade)

Due Thursday, September 13: Media literacy exercise (2%)

Due Thursday, September 20: [Gee definitions exercise (digital worksheet on
forums)][3] (5%)

Due Monday, October 1: [Fan production worksheet ][4] (3%)

Due Thursday, October 11: [New vs old media assignment (5 page paper or 7 page
script)][5] (12%)

Due Monday, November 5: [News, Ads, Representation, Ownership, and Regulation
(5 page paper or 7 page script)][6] (12%)

Due Wednesday, November 21: [Screencast][7] (14%)

Due Monday, December 3: Revision to a script, and storyboard (5%)

Due December 10-13: Video draft. FINAL DRAFT due December 16. (20%)

**Participation in class and on the class website will account for the
remaining 27% of your grade.**

## GRADING

  * **A.** An A student is one who, in addition to all the qualities
manifested by a B student, seeks mastery of a special field; s/he has
initiative and originality in attacking and solving problems; s/he shows
ability in rethinking problems, making associations, and adapting to new and
changing situations; moreover, s/ he has an appropriate vocabulary at his or
her command.

  * **B.** To earn a B grade a student must manifest all the qualities
characteristic of a C student and in addition be able to demonstrate skills
beyond the basic elements of the course; s/he has a more personal grasp of the
principles of the course and perceives wider application of them. The student
should be able to discuss the subject matter of the course with ease.

  * **C.** To earn a C grade a student must be able to demonstrate the basic
skills of a course, understand the essential background and materials of a
course, apply the basic principles involved, and express them intelligibly.

  * **D.** A student who is deficient in some degree in any of the areas that
are characteristic of a C grade will earn a D.

  * **F.** The student has failed to show mastery of the basic subject matter
for the course.

The grades of A-, B+, B-, C+, C-, D+, D- are used to indicate that a student
has shown more or less than the usual competency required for that grade.

## Disability support

Students with disabilities who believe they may need accommodations in this
class are encouraged to contact the Office of Special Services at 575-3274,
Donnelly Hall 226, or via email at specserv@marist.edu as soon as possible to
better ensure that such accommodations are implemented in a timely fashion.

## Cell Phone Policy

To help you and everyone around you concentrate, cell phone ringers and
vibrations are to remain OFF during class, as they would in a professional
office. Please refrain from texting, calling, or answering texts or calls in
class.

## ATTENDANCE POLICY

Attendance and punctuality are required. It is each student's responsibility
to sign the attendance sheet during every class. **Failure to sign the sheet
will result in an absence being recorded for that day.** If someone else signs
in for you, you will both lose three points from your final grade. If the
person who signs in for you admits to her/his misdeed, then only one point
will be deducted from your grade and her/his grade.

Every student will be allowed to miss two classes for any reason without a
penalty. There are no excused or unexcused absences.** Every absence after the
first two absences will result in three points being deducted from the
student's final grade.**

Arriving late and/or leaving early is unacceptable. You miss out on what we're
learning, and it distracts all of us. Do not arrive late to class or leave
class early. **Every tardy or early departure will result in one point being
deducted from your final grade. **

## How to Do Well in This Class

  * Attend all classes and participate constructively, i.e. answer questions,
ask questions, and offer helpful suggestions for others' works.

  * Do not cheat on any assignment.

  * Do not spam the instructor with any kind of communication, be it voice,
text, video, or direct messages in Second Life. (Particularly not direct
messages in Second Life, I'm almost never there anymore.)



## Class sessions

Session

Topic

DUE IN CLASS

Session 1, Monday, August 27

**Introductions**

Course overview

In-class writing assignment


Session 2, Thursday, August 30

**Media panics, media attitudes**

Have you ever heard it said that video games, movies, or the Internet are
harming people, or spreading violence, inappropriate content, or hate? Do you
agree or disagree, or kinda both? In this class, we will talk about attitudes
toward the media -- ours and other people's, not just today but throughout
history.

Watch in class:

Report on Colorado Batman shooting

versus Charlie Brooker's Newswipe (about 5 min total)



READ 2 of these 3 selections, your choice

[Comics Code History: The Seal of Approval][8] (5 pp)

Medieval and Greek writing: Clanchy p 294-300 (6 pp)

Children and Television: Lessons From Sesame Street: Lesser: 177-181

AND READ

[Is Google Making Us Stupid?][9] (8 pp)



WRITE (1 page):

[What do the "media panics" we're reading about have in common?][2]

LABOR DAY, MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 3 - NO CLASS

Session 3, Thursday, September 6

Come to class with questions about the reading. What didn't you understand?

In class: Begin discussing the truth claims made in each of the media panics
articles with your groups. How might we evaluate these claims?

READ:**

[TV Violence and the Art of Asking the Wrong Question][10] (5 pp)


**

Session 4, Monday, September 10:

**Media Studies Overview**

Let's clarify what we mean when we say "media." What's included, and what's
not included? What have a range of scholars said about how media fit into
society?

In class, we will talk about the truth claims made by the people referred to
in the articles we previously read, finishing the exercise from last Thursday.

READ:

**What are media? Buckingham, p 1-2

**Sardar and Van Loon, p 6, p 21-37

DO:

Meet with your group to finish the exercise we started in class.

Session 5, Thursday, September 13:

**What is Media Literacy?**

When we say someone is "media literate," what does that mean? Why do we call
it "literacy" when people aren't reading words?

READ:**

**Sardar and Van Loon, p 6, p 38-46

WRITE:

From "The Seven Great Debates in the Media Literacy Movement" (Renee Hobbs,
1998:

"At the 1993 Media Literacy National Leadership Conference, U.S. educators
could not agree on the range of appropriate goals for media education, or the
scope of appropriate instructional techniques, but they did identify the
following concepts, based on models developed by British, Australian and
Canadian

educators that should be included in the analysis of media messages:

  1. media messages are constructed

  2. media messages are produced within economic, social, political,
historical and aesthetic contexts

  3. the interpretative meaning-making processes involved in message reception
consists of an interaction between the reader, the text and the culture

  4. media have are unique 'languages,' characteristics which typify various
forms, genres and symbol systems of communication

  5. media representations play a role in people's understanding of social
reality"


Match each of Renee Hobbs's outline points to a media theory mentioned in what
you've read so far in Introducing Media Studies. There may be more than one
theory matched to more than of her numbered points, and vice versa. Send your
answers in to me via iLearn.


Session 6, Monday, September 17:

**Theories of the Media: Semiotics and literacy**

READ:

Gee, What Video Games Have To Teach Us About Learning And Literacy, pp 1-4,
13-21, 24-36

Post a question about the reading to the forum by 8 am Monday. What didn't you
understand? We'll discuss in class to help prepare you for the exercise due
Thursday.

Session 7, Thursday, September 20

**Theories of the Media: Semiotics and literacy**

In class: Meet The Media Show?

DUE:

[Gee definitions exercise ][3]

Session 8, Monday, September 24:

**Theories of the Media: Uses/Gratifications**

Preparation for next sessions: What do we mean by "representation"?

READ:

Prandstraller_ _(24 pp)

WRITE:

Come to class prepared to talk about Gee and Prandstraller. Post the following
response to the forum by 10 pm Sunday BEFORE CLASS.: Before reading these
pieces, what did the word "fans" mean to you? What did these two authors say
about fan communities that were new to you?

Session 9, Thursday, September 27:

**Making The Media: Representation**

One thing that just about all media scholars agree is that the media do not
reflect reality "as it is" -- because they are created by people, they always
represent some particular take on reality. You may have heard criticism of how
media represent women or people of color, or how they glorify criminals... but
have you thought about how they represent rich and poor people, people with
disabilities, different professions, or sports? In the next few classes we
will explore representation, and how it interacts with advertisers' plans to
reach audiences.

View in class: **Just A Game**

READ:

Pozner, In These Times, on wealth representation, branding, and reality TV (2
pp)

**Murketing**

WATCH:

Screenwipe, reality TV editing

A Hard Day's Work Law and Order supercut

The Media Show, Stock Photos

The Media Show, TV Tropes

Session 10, Monday, October 1:

**Making The Media: Audiences and Representation**

New media have also transformed the meanings and contexts of representations.
The Cluetrain Manifesto was produced by a couple of guys in advertising around
the year 2000, just as people were realizing how the Internet might change the
relationship between consumer audiences and advertisers. What else is
different in how people can interact with the media now?

READ:

Shirky, pp 122-130

Cluetrain Manifesto (7 pp)

WATCH:

The Media Show, Selling you

VIEW:

Superhero gender-bending

Disability art

WRITE:

[Fan production worksheet ][4](due to me via iLearn by BEFORE CLASS, Sunday at
10 pm)

Session 11, Thursday, October 4:

**Theories of the Media: Mass media theory**

Many of the critiques of the effects of media come from the era of _mass
media_ -- when there was less broadcast media and film content available,
there were fewer channels, and any given media property was much more likely
to reach a sizeable percentage of the population. How did this landscape
effect what got made -- and how people thought about the effects of media?

**McQuail (6th edition) on mass models, p 52-63** (there's one copy of this
book in the library, I will try to put it on reserve, but I will also try to
get you a PDF instead)

WRITE:

Post a question about the reading to the forum by 10 pm Wednesday BEFORE
CLASS. What didn't you understand? If it seemed relatively clear to you, what
stuck out to you as interesting in this reading?

Session 12, Monday, October 8:

**From Mass Media to Participatory Media**

Digital media have radically changed the shape of fame and audience attention.

READ:

Shirky, pp 81-108

WRITE:

By 10 pm Sunday BEFORE CLASS, post to the forum one thing mass media theorists
assumed about media. What does Shirky say the transition to digital media has
changed about this assumption?

Session 13, Thursday, October 11:

**Making The Media: Participatory Media and Audiences**

Watch in class:

15 Million Merits

DUE:

[New vs old media assignment][5] (due to me via iLearn by 9 AM if you are in
the 9:30 class, by noon if you are in the 12:30 class)

Session 14, Monday, October 15:

**Making The Media: Commercial constraints

**

Advertising may seem like an annoying interruption to the media we actually
want to be "reading." But in fact, it shapes the media in fundamental ways. We
transition from discussing how media makers' conceptions of audiences interact
with their representations, to discussing how advertising funding shapes those
audiences, and ultimately shapes the media we see.

READ:

McChesney, Age of Hyper-Commercialism p 138-153

WRITE:

Post a question about the reading to the forum by 10 pm Sunday BEFORE CLASS.
What didn't you understand? If it seemed relatively clear to you, what stuck
out to you as interesting in this reading?

Session 15, Thursday, October 18:

**Making The Media: Commercial constraints**

READ:

McChesney, Age of Hyper-Commercialism p 153-168

WRITE:

Post a question about the reading to the forum by 10 pm Wednesday BEFORE
CLASS. What didn't you understand? If it seemed relatively clear to you, what
stuck out to you as interesting in this reading?

Session 16, Monday, October 22:

**Making The Media: Ownership and Regulation

**Advertising shapes media by being a funding source, but other forces shape
what we see as well. We'll start discussing the impact of ownership and
government regulation on the content that media-makers give us.

READ:

McChesney, Advertising and Policy p 168-174, Market Uber Alles p 175-189

WRITE:

Post a question about the reading to the forum by 10 pm Sunday BEFORE CLASS.
What didn't you understand? If it seemed relatively clear to you, what stuck
out to you as interesting in this reading?

Session 17, Thursday, October 25:

**Making The Media: Ownership and Regulation**

WATCH:

Media Show: Cootie Catcher (Synergy)

READ:

McChesney, The Market Uber Alles p 189-209

WRITE:

Post to the forum by 10 pm Wednesday BEFORE CLASS. What surprised you or was
new to you about this reading?

Session 18, Monday, October 29:

**Making The Media: Breaking The News

**We trust news outlets to pick the stories that are important to our lives
and report on them accurately. But as with all the other media we have
studied, the news is constructed -- it's not just an unaltered reflection of
reality. We'll discuss some of the ways that the news is impacted by the shape
of the genre, the channels through which we receive it, and decisions made by
editors and reporters.

Watch in class: Brooker, Newswipe, [How To Report The News][11]

READ:

Fallows: 129-143; 165-181

WRITE:

Post to the forum by 10 pm Sunday BEFORE CLASS. What surprised you or was new
to you about this reading?

Session 19, Thursday, November 1:

**Making The Media: Breaking The News

**Of course, a lot has changed since Fallows was writing in the mid-nineties.
Shirky describes some of the changes to journalism wrought by digital media.

Watch** "From Indymedia to Demand Media: Participation, Surveillance, and the
Transformation of Journalism,"** a talk by Professor Chris Anderson at the
Next HOPE Conference.

READ:

Shirky, pp 55-80

WRITE:

Read the News, Ads, Representation, Ownership, and Regulation assignment that
will be due Monday. Send the topic which you think you will write about to me
via iLearn by 10 pm Wednesday BEFORE CLASS. We can talk about this so you can
be sure you have a solid topic idea.

Session 20, Monday, November 5:

**Aspects of Digital Media: Robots**

While computers seem to get "smarter" every year, able to predict what we want
before we even know we want it, beneath the surface layer of interaction they
still think like robots. To understand why they do what they do, we may still
need to think like robots to communicate well with them and get them to do
what we want. The next few classes explore some of the ways in which computers
"read" and "think" differently from people, with limitations and demands which
are helpful when we're trying to figure out how to "read" digital media.

We may be able to chat with Finn Brunton, the author of this reading, via
Skype in class.

READ:

**Brunton, ch 2 section 4 on Robot Readability (about 20 pp) **

DUE:

[News, Ads, Representation, Ownership, and Regulation paper/script][6]

Session 21, Thursday, November 8:

**Aspects of Digital Media: Identification, Verifiability, and Trust

**We talked about Wikipedia a little bit earlier in this class, waaay back
when we were trying to figure out whether we found the sources of the "media
panics" articles to be reliable. Today we're going to look into how volunteer
Wikipedia writers are asked to back up their truth claims as factual. We're
also going to think about how names online shape our trust of what we read.

Tutorial in class: How to make a screencast

READ:

boyd, [real names policies are an abuse of power

][12]Wikipedia policies:

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Verifiability][13]

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Reliable_sources][14]

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:No_original_research][15]

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Neutral_point_of_view][16]

Session 22, Monday, November 12:

**Aspects of Digital Media: Is Code Law?**

Tutorial: Using WhoIs

READ: Lessig, Architectures of Credentials, 38-54

Post a question about the reading to the forum by 10 pm Sunday BEFORE CLASS.
What didn't you understand?

Session 23, Thursday, November 15

**Aspects of Digital Media: Privacy**

Troubleshooting on screencasts

READ:

boyd et al, 22 pp

Post to the forum by 10 pm Sunday BEFORE CLASS. What surprised you or stuck
out as interesting about this article?

Session 24, Monday, November 19:


**Aspects of Digital Media: Privacy **

We'll be watching "Privacy is Dead," a talk given by private investigator
Steven Rambam at the Hackers On Planet Earth (HOPE) Conference.

Work on your screencast project.

[][7] DUE WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 21 AT NOON ON ILEARN: [SCREENCAST][7] project.

ALSO: Post the script you are going to use for your [final project][17] to the
forums at the same time.

THANKSGIVING BREAK, THURSDAY NOVEMBER 22 - NO CLASS - but see assignment due
the Monday we come back!

Session 25, Monday, November 26:

**Work on scripts and storyboards for [final project.][17]**

Discuss in class what's expected of scripts and storyboards.

WRITE:

Comment on the scripts that THREE of your classmates have posted to the iLearn
forum, giving them constructive criticism for their final project. Things you
might talk about:

Is it clear from the script what we are going to see on screen? What else
could they do to communicate their ideas visually instead of using words?

Do the ideas from class they are talking about come through clearly in the
dialog?

Where does the dialog sound more natural or less natural to you (i.e. would
you hear real people saying this)?

**For Tuesday November 27 and Wednesday November 28: Contact Dr. Andrews by
email to set up a meeting during her office hours to discuss your final
project. Do NOT leave it to the last minute to set this up.**

Session 26, Thursday, November 29

**Workshop storyboards and scripts in class

**

DUE:

Post your revised script to iLearn by Wednesday at 10 pm, BEFORE CLASS.

Session 27, Monday, December 3

**Copyright and Fair Use

**Watch The Media Show: What's Fair Use?

**In-class video production training with the AV department.**

WRITE:

Post final script and storyboard to iLearn forum by 10 pm Sunday BEFORE CLASS.

Schedule time to see Dr. Andrews during office hours December 4 and 5 if you
feel you need additional video production help.

Session 28, Thursday, December 6:

**Work on producing videos in and out of class.**


Session 29, Monday, December 10:

**Final Project Presentations; Project Draft Due**


Session 30, Thursday, December 13:

**Final Project Presentations; Project Draft Due**


**[Final draft of final project due][17], posted to iLearn by midnight, Sunday
December 16th**


* * *


### Media panics (1 page, due Thursday, August 30)

**What do the "media panics" we're reading about have in common?** Gerbner
said "The usual question - "Does television violence incite real-life
violence?" - is itself a symptom rather than diagnostic tool of the problem."
What might he have said was "the usual question" about medieval writing, the
alphabet, comic books, Google, and Sesame Street? What do you think people's
concerns about these media products were "symptoms" of?


### Gee definitions exercise (digital worksheet on forum, due Thursday,
September 20)

**This assignment will probably be easier if you provide examples of something
in the media that YOU are a fan of. But if you're uncomfortable sharing, you
can describe someone else and the media they are a fan of.**

**Copy and paste these questions on the forum. Write your answers between the
questions, _as full sentences,_ formatting the questions differently (bold,
italic, different color, whatever) and using line spacing to be sure
everything is readable.**

Give me a tour of a SEMIOTIC DOMAIN and an IDENTITY related to a movie, band,
show, broadcast event, book, comic, website, game, or other media "text." Use
examples from the Internet.

What SEMIOTIC DOMAIN are you going to be talking about?

Link to a site which relates to this semiotic domain.

Remember that a specific semiotic domain is different from "general
knowledge."

Give me an example of an IDENTITY a person might take on to be a part of this
semiotic domain.

Then give me an example of an IDENTITY that person might have elsewhere in
their life which might conflict with their identity in that semiotic domain.

Why might these two identities conflict?

Give me an example of an AFFINITY GROUP within this semiotic domain.

Link to or post two VISUAL things that you/this person would need to be able
to "read" to participate in the literacy specific to this domain. (Be
specific: this should either be links to image files like .jpg or .png; if
you're linking to a whole page, you need to tell me which visual element you
are referring to.)

For each one:

What does the "reader" need to know to interpret these visual elements within
this specific domain?

How is the SITUATED MEANING of this visual element different in this domain
than in another domain?

Give two examples of DESIGN GRAMMAR elements that you/this person need to know
to be LITERATE about this domain.

Link to something which relates to a SOCIAL PRACTICE specific to this domain.
In a couple of sentences, describe this social practice.

How is the SITUATED MEANING of this social practice seen differently by people
who do and do not participate in this domain?


### Fan production worksheet (due Monday, October 1)

Online, find an example of fans who have created their own content -- writing,
art, video, etc -- based on a mass media property.

Places to start looking for fan works (but anywhere you find it is fine):

  * DeviantArt

  * Know Your Meme

  * Fanfiction.net

  * TVTropes

  * YouTube

On the forum, link to it (post it if it is an image, embed it if it is a
video).

Briefly say something about what you think the original message of the media
property is, as well as the intended original audience.

Describe who you think the new audience of the "repurposed" text is (age?
gender? race? class? education level?).

Answer these questions in your writing:

How have the fans "subverted" the original message, or if you don't think they
have, why would you say they have not?

Think back to Jim Gee's writing on video games and affinity groups, and
Prandstraller's article on fans writing about U2. Would you say, like they do,
that these fans are "active consumers" who are creating new meanings? Why or
why not?

###

New vs old media assignment (5 page paper or 7 page script, due Thursday,
October 11)

So now we've talked about how digital media differ from traditional
conceptions of "mass" media. As Shirky points out, many of our societal
assumptions about how the media work are still carried over from the age of
mass media. For this assignment, I want you to think about the interactions of
new and old media.

Please compare the descriptions of new digital and old mass media from Shirky
and McQuail to support your arguments.

Pick one of these topics:

  1. Ideas about how mass media shape the critiques of representation of race,
class, gender, ability, and other social groups ("affinity groups"?). In what
ways have media environments and audiences changed that requires a change in
how we think about who is represented and how in the media? In what ways have
things stayed the same? (Please address both questions.)

  2. Think back to the "media effects" research and critiques we read
earlier-- the studies of children and television, and the Gerbner and
Gauntlett articles. In a digitally-mediated society, what has changed that
supports or detracts from these assumptions about how media influence people?
You will want to work off of what Shirky says.

  3. Mass media and digital media exist side by side these days. Both Shirky
and McQuail present claims about the effects of the "shape" of new and old
media (the "pipe" or the "channel" through which they get to us, NOT the
content. Think back to how the "Is Google Making Us Stupid" article and the
mentions of McLuhan's "the medium is the message" in Introducing Media
Studies). How are "technological determinist" claims made by Shirky, McQuail,
the Google piece, and McLuhan supported by or undermined by the ways new and
old media interact?

You have three options for writing this:

  * Option 1: write it as a traditional paper; 5 pages.

  * Option 2: write it as a script for a five-minute episode of The Media
Show, using Weena, Erna, the Intern, and other characters as you see fit; 7
pages.

  * Option 3: write it as a script for your own five-minute video; 7 pages.

  * We are not producing these videos yet! Just work on the script.

  * You WILL need to have one script for the end of the semester project, so
consider whether you might like to use this one or the next one.

**IF YOU ARE WRITING A SCRIPT**: Be sure to specify how you will use visual
elements to demonstrate the points you are making. Video is a visual medium;
there's no point in using it if you're just going to have someone lecturing to
the camera! (Yeah, I know. I am bad at following this advice myself.) See the
example script if you need some guidance on how to include visuals.

Recommended scriptwriting software: [Celtx][18] (it's free!)


### News, Ads, Representation, Ownership, and Regulation assignment (5 page
paper or 7 page script, due Monday, November 5)

Pick a term or concept from the readings we have recently done on news, ads,
representation, ownership, or regulation. Write a script to explain it to
other students. One way you could do this would be as an argument about the
topic between two people (like the puppets on The Media Show).


You have three options for writing this:

  * Option 1: write it as a traditional paper; 5 pages. (UNLESS you did your
last assignment as a paper -- you need to have one script for the end of the
semester project.)

  * Option 2: write it as a script for a five-minute episode of The Media
Show, using Weena, Erna, the Intern, and other characters as you see fit; 7
pages.

  * Option 3: write it as a script for your own five-minute video; 7 pages.

  * We are not producing these videos yet! Just work on the script.

**IF YOU ARE WRITING A SCRIPT**: Be sure to specify how you will use visual
elements to demonstrate the points you are making. Video is a visual medium;
there's no point in using it if you're just going to have someone lecturing to
the camera! (Yeah, I know. I am bad at following this advice myself.) See the
example script if you need some guidance on how to include visuals.

Recommended scriptwriting software: [Celtx][18] (it's free!)

###

Screencast (due Monday, November 19)

Using software like [Jing][19], [Camtasia][20], [Fraps][21], [HyperCam][22],
or [iShowU][23], do a walkthrough of a site that you use regularly.

Navigate through and show the following elements of the website, and evaluate
the following in your voiceover:

  * Identifying the site. Who is involved in creating, editing, and moderating
the content on this site? How do you know? How easy or hard is it to tell?
Visit the site About page (if there is one, or talk about the lack of an About
page if there isn't.)

  * Do a WhoiIs lookup of the site's address, and talk about what you find.
Also interpret the site address: what does it tell you about the site?

  * Advertising. What does the advertising on this site (or lack of it) tell
you about the intended audience for this site? About yourself as an audience?

  * Robot-readable elements. Which elements are there more for search engines
to read than for human users?

  * Privacy features. Do you feel this site adequately considers users'
privacy? Why or why not?

  * Name conventions. How does this site ask users to identify themselves -
with real names? Nicknames? Do they need to give financial or geographic
information to sign up?

###

Videos, scripts, and storyboards (see due dates on grid above)

The final project will be producing a 3-5 minute video communicating an idea
from the class to other students. You will revise a script you wrote for an
earlier assignment for this project. I will meet with each of you to help you
plan your ideas, helping make sure they'll satisfy the course requirement and
that you're not trying to do something too big for a final project.

As I said earlier: Be sure to specify in your script how you will use visual
elements to demonstrate the points you are making. Video is a visual medium;
there's no point in using it if you're just going to have someone lecturing to
the camera! (Yeah, I know. I am bad at following this advice myself.) See the
example script if you need some guidance on how to include visuals.

In addition to developing a **script** you will also develop a **storyboard**
to plan the shots for your video. We will **workshop** both of these in class
before the due date. We may also workshop your **rough cuts** so you have a
chance to improve your videos before the final presentation.

###


## If you liked this,

## read this

Here Comes Everybody

Goldhaber, [The Attention Economy and the Net][24]

Breaking The News

Marche, [The Real Problem with Niall Ferguson's Letter to the 1%][25]

Bogost, [Speaking of Fees... The facile scourge of paid speaking][26]

 

